[rock music]
♪ Oh baby baby why
you act so cold ♪
♪ That little dress
hotter than July ♪
♪ Your mama said look
out for guys like me ♪
♪ But you keep on cheating
out the corner your eye ♪
♪ I'm trying to be
- Space, the final
frontier. [laughs]
For all dinos.
- Yeah, what's your point?
- Come on, Scale, we have
the opportunity to become
a bona fide Jurassic
genius, two smart dinosaurs,
flying through space on
a mission for knowledge.
- I'm an armadillo, Fang.
- Well, yeah, but you're like
a dinosaur, a little one.
Teeny tiny.
- Teeny tiny!
- For a dinosaur, yeah,
small yet ferocious.
- So dialing back,
I'm an armadillo.
- Okay, okay, you're an
armadillo but you're my partner
and we're on this
adventure together.
All for one and one for all.
Viva la dino.
- Oh boy, so we're out to
collect information and learn,
right?
- Yeah, fly fast and learn away.
- Well then, let's
get the professor with
the most knowledge
in the universe on
the monitor, stat.
- Good day, you two,
how's my favorite duo?
And their Jurassic juggernaut?
- We're ready to get our
knowledge on, professor.
- Let's get to it.
Did you know that dinosaurs
are a very diverse group
of reptiles who form a
family called dinosauria?
[dramatic music]
These beasties first appeared
during the Triassic period
which took place a
really long time ago.
We're talking between 231
and 243 million years.
It's hard to believe
that anything is that old
but science seems to prove it.
The exact origin and timing
of the evolution of dinosaurs
is the subject of active
research and many scientists
and paleontologists still argue
about it to this very day.
[dramatic music]
Dinosaurs became the
dominant species of creature
after the Triassic
Jurassic extinction event
201 million years ago.
Their dominance continued
through the Jurassic
and Cretaceous periods.
[dramatic music]
Want to know
something super cool?
Fossil records indicate that
birds we know and love today
are actually modern
feathered dinosaurs,
having evolved
from earlier dinos
during the late Jurassic period.
Crazily enough, birds
were the only dinosaurs
to survive the Cretaceous
Paleogene extinction event
that happened about
66 million years ago.
Next time you see one of
your feathered friends,
think about this, you're
looking at a real life,
live dinosaur, wow!
[dramatic music]
[creature growls]
Overall, dinosaurs come in two
different types of species,
avian meaning birdlike
and non avian dinosaurs
which are all dinosaurs
other than birdlike.
Let's look at both
kinds and hope to learn
some really neat stuff
about these massive beasts.
[ominous music]
Currently, there are over
10,000 living species of birds
and that makes the most
diverse group of animals
besides fish to still be
cruising around our planet.
So how many
dinosaurs were there?
That's a great question,
using fossil evidence,
scientists, specifically
paleontologists,
have identified over 500
distinct birdlike creatures
and more than 1000 different
species of non avian dinosaur.
[ominous music]
Dinosaurs are represented
on every continent
both by live birds
and fossil remains.
- Wow, that's news to me.
- See, a little more lip zip
and a little more eyes open
works wonders.
- How was that for brain
blasting knowledge?
- Amazing.
- Dino-riffic.
- I'm happy to hear.
- Professor Claw, we're hungry.
- Oh, your refrigerator's
empty already?
- Not hungry for
food, professor, we're
drooling for details
- Famished for facts.
- Oh. [laughs]
Well, all you had to do was ask.
[creature growls]
When talking about
dinosaurs, it's impossible
to not mention the
biggest guy of them all,
the king of all creatures,
the tyrannosaurus rex
or T rex for short, let's
get to know the toughest dino
to ever walk the earth who
lived about 65 to 70 million
years ago in the late
Cretaceous period.
[creature growls]
Even its name is big,
tyrannosaurus rex translates to
tyrant or king lizard and
this beast earns every bit
of its name, the T rex
walks high and proud
on two massive and muscular
legs and is balanced
by an equally massive tail.
[creature growls]
The average tyrannosaurus rex
weighed seven and a half tons
and stood anywhere from
10 to nearly 20 feet tall.
This gigantic beast was
also about 40 foot long
from head to tail, ha, that's
bigger than most houses.
Even the T rex's teeth are
huge with the largest one
discovered being measured
at 13 inches long.
That's bigger than a
standard sized ruler, wow!
[creature growls]
Let's check out a
really cool dinosaur.
Meet the velociraptor,
scary, right?
But also pretty amazing,
let's learn why.
[gentle music]
Velociraptor means
swift seizer in Latin.
This hungry dinosaur lived
approximately 71 to 75 million
years ago during the latter
part of what was known
as the Cretaceous period.
[gentle music]
The velociraptor which
commonly is shortened to raptor
is one of the dinosaurs
most familiar to kids
due to its starring role
in the Jurassic Park
motion picture series.
Velociraptors were
relatively small compared
to other dinosaurs, that is.
In fact, in real life,
velociraptors were just barely
bigger than a turkey.
They grew to about
six feet in length
and weighed in at
about 45 pounds.
That's considerably smaller
than the approximately
seven foot tall, 180 pound
reptile seen in the movies.
Hah, phew.
[gentle music]
The velociraptor was a
bipedal, feathered carnivore
with a long tail and an
enlarged sickle shaped claw
on each hind foot.
The hind foot is their
back foot, by the way.
This claw is thought to
have been used to hunt
and eat their prey.
The velociraptor
can be distinguished
from other dinosaurs of its kind
by its long and low skull
with an upturned snout.
[gentle music]
What's that, you ask?
A feathered dinosaur?
Yes, fossils found in China
tell us that the velociraptor
did indeed have
feathered quill knobs.
Amazing right, just like a bird.
But those feathers were
not used for flight.
Instead, it's believed
that the feathers
were a way to maintain warmth
or maybe even were used
to attract a mate.
[creature growls]
[acoustic music]
What's that noise, a big
truck, a train racing by?
In the days of the dinosaur,
that rumble you're hearing
would be coming from a big
daddy in the Jurassic age
known as the triceratops.
Let's get to know
them a little better.
[gentle music]
Despite its rough
and armored exterior,
the triceratops is a plant
eating tank of a creature
which first appeared
about 68 million years ago
in what is now known
as North America.
[gentle music]
The triceratops is one
of the most popular
and recognizable
dinosaurs around
and that has made
him a celebrity among
his fellow dinos.
[creature rumbles]
These wonderful animals
have been featured in films
like Jurassic Park and even in
Transformers the Last Knight.
[creature rumbles]
[gentle music]
They have appeared on
postage stamps, in cartoons,
on trading cards, you name it.
The state of Wyoming even
named the triceratops
their state dinosaur,
what a popular dude!
The line for autographs
forms to the left.
[gentle music]
Triceratops are like kings as
they have a large bony crown
around their massive
heads and three horns
to ensure it's well protected.
Given the look of
its four legged body,
it is commonly
compared to the modern
single horned rhinoceros
that you can see
at your favorite
zoos around the world
or sometimes maybe even
it's compared to elephants
which are commonly
believed to be good luck.
The triceratops
needs its huge horns
to defend itself against
other, bigger dinosaurs
such as the T rex
who was also alive
during that point in history.
Can you imagine these two
heavyweights squaring off?
What a fight.
None of today's best
fighters or wrestlers
would stand a chance
against either of them.
[drum music]
- Wow, what a trip.
- Yeah, the things you
can learn at the helm
of your own spaceship
with an intergalactic
dinosaur teacher at your
disposal for space consultation.
- I know, right?
- And that's not all, Scale.
Let me hit you with more facts.
[creature growls]
[drum music]
Next up on our
prehistoric adventure,
we check in with one nasty dude,
the meat eating predator
known as the abelisaurus.
The abelisaurus's name
roughly translates
to Abel's lizard, so who
was Abel and what made him
special enough to get
his very own dinosaur?
Well, we're going to have
to use our heads to find out
or [laughs] more
specifically, its head.
[creature growls]
No one has ever found
a full abelisaurus.
In fact, only its head has
been discovered, that's right.
Believe it or not,
everything we know
about the abelisaurus
we know from a single skull.
Back in 1983, a man named
Roberto Abel found the skull.
He was the director of the
Provincial Museum of Cipoletti
in Argentina, though this
skull is far from complete,
it is a general rule of thumb
that one side of a skull
is pretty much the
same as the other.
[creature growls]
This one abelisaurus fossil
sported so many unique features
that it was nominated to
anchor an entire family
of dinosaurs called the
abelisauridae in 1985.
[creature growls]
[drum music]
Scientists have noted
that the abelisaurus
lived during the late
Cretaceous period
approximately 85
million years ago
in the area we now
know as Patagonia.
[drum music]
Even though its exact
size is currently unknown,
it is believed that this
amazing creature was about
30 feet long.
[jungle music]
When your parents or maybe
even your grandparents
were your age, there was
an incredible TV show
on the air called
the Land of the Lost
and it featured a
bunch of cool dinosaurs
but it is the show's
main star we're going
to be talking about here.
On the show they named it Alice,
but we all know it as
the fearsome allosaurus.
[jungle music]
The allosaurus was
a large dinosaur
that lived 150 to
155 million years ago
during the late Jurassic period.
The name allosaurus
means different lizard,
but what is so
different about it?
Well, other than being a
TV star, let's find out.
[jungle music]
What made this large meat
eating predator different
was the structure of its
backbone, which was rounded
and so what?
Well, a rounded backbone
wasn't very common
at the time of its discovery.
The allosaurus, which happens
to be Utah's state fossil,
is the most common
dinosaur fossil
found in Utah's
Cleveland Lloyd quarry,
a site containing the
densest concentration
of Jurassic dinosaur
bones in the world.
[jungle music]
Of the what is believed to
be 74 individual dinosaurs
found at the quarry,
about 46 of them
are allosaurus skeletons.
The bulk of allosaurus fossils
we've uncovered thus far
come from the Morrison formation
which can be found in
Wyoming and Colorado.
[jungle music]
[creature growls]
Like the tyrannosaurs,
allosaurus walked on
its two back legs.
Its skull was large and
equipped with dozens
of sharp sawlike teeth
that averaged 28 to 39 feet
in length and stood
nearly 38 feet tall.
The allosaurus must
have been a good hunter
because it sure did eat a lot.
Scientists estimate
that an adult allosaurus
could have weighed in at
around 10,000 pounds, wow!
[tribal music]
Like other dinosaurs
in its family,
the allosaurus had large
and powerful back legs
and its three fingered
arms were much smaller.
The allosaurus
would stay balanced
thanks to its long and
heavily muscled tail.
[creature growls]
Wherever it lived,
the allosaurus
was at the top of
its food chain.
Not only was it super
strong and mean,
but it was incredibly
sneaky for its size,
scientists believe
that the allosaurus
was a great hunter and may
have attacked large prey
by ambush, using its
upper jaw like a hatchet.
Yikes, watch out.
It's no wonder why the
allosaurus has been featured
in all forms of media, from
TV to movies to cartoons.
It was truly a scary character.
[creature growls]
Time to meet one of the
coolest dinosaurs ever.
I'm going to introduce
you to the enormous
and charming stegosaurus.
The stegosaurus walked the land
sometime between 150 and
155 million years ago.
In the western United States
and in modern day Portugal.
[creature growls]
[tribal music]
These peaceful plant
eaters were large
and extremely heavy.
An adult stegosaurus
could weigh about as much
as 6800 pounds.
That's over three tons.
Imagine all the salad
you'd have to eat
to become that heavy.
These magnificent beasts
were about 40 feet long
and nine feet tall.
They had rounded backs
and walked on all
four of their legs.
[gentle music]
[creature screeches]
Speaking of their legs,
they had short front ones
and really long
hind or back ones.
They proudly carried
their spike tipped tails
high in the air as a means
to let other big bully dinos
like the allosaurus
and ceratosaurus know
that they should stay away.
[creature growls]
[jungle music]
The first scientists who
discovered the stegosaurus
back in 1877 thought
that their large plates
resembled roof shingles and
that's how it got its name.
Stegosaurus means roofed lizard.
Can you imagine living in a
house with stegosaurus plates
on top, you would for sure
be the most popular fella
in town with lots of
friends, [laughs],
just like the stegosaurus.
These beautiful beasts
had lots of buddies
that they shared the world with
such as the apatosaurus,
diplodocus, and
the brachiosaurus.
I'll be sure and tell you
about those critters later.
[dramatic music]
Well, what do you think
of all that, guys?
- Incredible.
- Eye opening.
- Fang-tastic.
- It is, now see what
you think of this.
[dramatic music]
Our next prehistoric
is none other
than the walking tank of a
dinosaur, the ankylosaurus.
Let's take a look at this
heavily armored wonder.
[dramatic music]
Ankylosaurus means fused
or stiffened lizard.
Their skeletons have been
found in geological formations
dating to the very end
of the Cretaceous period
about 66 to 68
million years ago.
They've been found in
western North America
during that time,
making it among the last
of the non birdlike
dinosaurs discovered.
The ankylosaurus was a
massive, plant eating beast.
It stood about 11 feet
tall, just over a quarter
of the size of New
York's Statue of Liberty
and could grow up to
be about 30 feet long.
What, wow!
[dramatic music]
[creature growls]
This big dude sure
was heavy, too.
It weighed around 13,000
pounds when it was fully grown.
That's over six tons
and about as much
as 77 adult humans, oh my!
[creature growls]
[dramatic music]
A prominent feature of
ankylosaurus was its armor.
It consisted of knobs
and plates of bone
known as osteoderms or
scutes embedded within
their tough skin.
Scientists are not sure
the exact placement
of these plates on old anky,
but various configurations
have been proposed over the
years, giving it the cool look
that we're all familiar with.
[creature growls]
Though not directly
related to them,
similar body armor can be
found on today's crocodiles
and armadillos.
The ankylosaurus was
certainly something to behold,
especially that
tail, check that out!
[drum music]
Dinosaurs are cool and
larger than life creatures
and people have always
been fascinated by them
but have you ever found
yourself wondering
what one of the biggest
dinosaurs in the world was?
One that would even make
the mighty T rex shake?
I'm here to introduce you to
one of them, the spinosaurus.
[drum music]
The spinosaurus, whose
name means spine lizard,
used to stomp around what is
known now to be North Africa.
About 93 to 112
million years ago.
They also lived in Egypt.
The first one was discovered
in 1912 by scientists
who were happy and excited to
find a new breed of creature
that was until then yet unknown.
[flute music]
The spinosaurus was among
the largest of all known
meat eating dinosaurs and
could grow to be even larger
than the T rex.
These things were huge.
[tribal music]
Their skulls alone
would reach lengths
of over five feet long
and from head to tail they've
been known to be measured
nearly 60 feet.
Imagine this, just five of these
lined up next to each other
would be about as large and
long as a football field, wow!
And whoa were they heavy.
The average spinosaurus
would weigh in
at anywhere between
seven to up over 20 tons.
That's as much as three
adult elephants, yowza!
[tribal music]
The coolest and most unique
thing about them, though,
was the giant sail that
they had on their backs.
This sail was made up of
massive spike shaped bones
that were joined together
by a rugged layer of skin.
What was the sail for other
than to make them look awesome?
It is believed that the sail,
when turned toward the sun,
could help keep the bodies of
these cold blooded creatures
nice and warm.
We have to use coats
and sweaters to do that.
Dinosaurs were so much
cooler than we are.
[creature growls]
Wanna talk about cool?
This next dinosaur,
the archaeopteryx,
is known to be the beast
that bridges the gap
between non flying
birdlike dinosaurs
and modern birds.
It's like the feathered
missing link, sorry Bigfoot.
The archaeopteryx whose
name means ancient wing
was originally thought to be
a bird and not a dinosaur.
It wasn't until somewhere
around the late 19th century
and the early 20th century
that it was discovered
the archaeopteryx was not
the oldest known bird.
That's right, further study
proved them to be dinosaurs.
[gentle music]
The archaeopteryx lived
during what is known as
the late Jurassic period
around 150 million years ago.
In a land that is now
part of Southern Germany.
It was there during a time
when Europe was an archipelago
of islands in a warm
tropical sea much closer
to the equator than it is now.
[gentle music]
Similar in size to the
common magpies or ravens
that we know today to be
flying our friendly skies,
the largest species of
archaeopteryx could grow
to about one foot,
eight inches in length.
Yet even though it
was small in size,
with broad wings this little
birdie did not possess
the ability to fly or
even glide, or did it?
[gentle music]
Scientists of today still
debate whether or not
the archaeopteryx flew or not.
In 2010, paleontologists
claimed that the creature
had weak feather shafts
which made flying impossible
given its weight, but then
other scientists claimed
that the paleontologists'
findings were incorrect
and that they overestimated the
weight of the archaeopteryx.
In truth, whether
or this little dino
could take to the skies
or not is something we
will never truly know.
What do you think?
[gentle music]
Are you ready?
A race is on and to
win it you're going
to have to be faster
than one of the quickest
dinosaurs to ever run amok.
Let's say hello to
the coelophysis.
[gentle music]
[creature rumbles]
The coelophysis whose names
translates to hollow form
lived approximately 196
to 203 million years ago
during what was the latter
part of the Triassic period,
located primarily
in what is now known
as the southwestern part
of the United States.
This little guy was
also a world traveler.
The coelophysis could also
be found in South Africa
and even Zimbabwe.
[gentle music]
The coelophysis was a small
and slender meat eating
dinosaur that stood and ran
quickly on its two strong legs.
[gentle music]
Fully grown, an adult
coelophysis could reach almost
10 feet long, three feet tall
and weigh about 100 pounds.
That's about the size
of a five year old boy.
[gentle music]
Coelophysis had hollow
bones and this made it
a very fast and agile runner,
capable of reaching speeds
of more than 30 miles per hour.
[gentle music]
Even cooler, the coelophysis
was also the first ever
dinosaur discovered
that had a furcula.
What's that?
No, it's not a
famous fuzzy vampire.
It's a wishbone, just like
the kind you would find
in a turkey at Thanksgiving.
Imagine having a coelophysis
for dinner instead of a turkey.
Hope you have a big family,
ha, if you won the snapping
of the wishbone, what
would you wish for?
It's a good thing
coelophysis was so fast
because if you got
a good look at it,
you may laugh at the
look on his face.
This little critter had
massive eyes for his size
and he may have looked
funny but he was very smart.
Those big eyes indicated
that this little track star
had a big brain to
go along with them.
Scientists also
believe those same eyes
helped it hunt at night thanks
to the extra visual
information it could spy.
[tribal music]
Coelophysis was first
discovered way back in the 1880s
and after that, they were
kind of hard to find.
They didn't stay hidden
for long, though.
In 1947, when a
dutiful fossil hunter
discovered thousands
of coelophysis bones
representing all growth
stages from hatchlings
to juveniles to
teenagers and adults,
tangled together in New
Mexico's ghost ranch quarry.
This led to the coelophysis
being named the official
state dinosaur of New Mexico.
Ha, how cool is that?
[tribal music]
Maybe one day you'll be an
official something in your state
and if that happens,
make sure you remember.
[creature growls]
This next dino-riffic creature
is full of bull-loney.
Well, not really, we
don't know if it lied
to get the best
meals or anything.
We just know that the
carnotaurus had a few things
in common with the
bulls you see today.
Let's find out what.
The carnotaurus, whose
name literally means
meat eating bull was a
pretty big and hungry dude
who lived in South
America during the
late Cretaceous period
about 69 to 72
million years ago.
[piano music]
Carnotaurus was a highly
recognizable beast.
Like the bulls we
mentioned earlier of today,
our friend here at thick
horns above its eyes,
a feature unseen in all
other meat eating dinosaurs.
It also had a very
deep skull sitting
on a super muscular neck.
[piano music]
Carnotaurus was big and
strong and except for
its massive horns,
it also looked
a lot like the
tyrannosaurus rex.
The carnotaurus grew
to about 30 feet long,
around nine feet tall and
weighed in at over 3000 pounds.
That's as big as 10
gorillas. [laughs]
[piano music]
Despite being that big in size,
its bones were
relatively lightweight
and because of that, the
carnotaurus could run fast.
About 35 miles per hour.
This would make it much faster
than an average human of today
and almost as fast
as a crafty cougar.
An adult carnotaurus
could even keep up
with the speedy kangaroo,
who can hop up to
44 miles per hour.
Whoa, how cool would it
have been to see that race?
[epic music]
Of all the plant
eating dinosaurs that
have been discovered
the gigantic brontosaurus
is without question
the most famous and
coolest of them all.
Let's find out all
there is to know
about this long necked wonder.
[epic music]
The brontosaurus, whose
name means thunder lizard,
lived around 150
million years ago
during the Jurassic
period in the western part
of the northern hemisphere.
Its remains have been
found in Utah, Wyoming
and even Mexico.
It was an incredibly big,
heavy and strong dinosaur
with its tiny head held
upon its super long neck,
it could reach lengths of
about 70 to 90 feet tall.
That's almost 3/4 of New
York's Statue of Liberty,
which is over 150 feet tall.
Maybe the brontosaurus could
tickle her under her arm.
Ha, that would be funny.
[epic music]
The brontosaurus
wasn't just tall.
He was also about 72
feet long and he weighed
around 33,000 pounds, whoa.
That's as big as a
small cruise ship,
can you imagine sailing on
the back of a brontosaurus?
If you could climb up
to the top of its head,
you could really
get a good sun tan.
[creature roars]
The brontosaurus was a
peaceful and friendly dinosaur
but sometimes other mean
dinosaurs would pick
a fight with it,
not a good idea.
As the brontosaurus would
use its powerful tail
as a weapon to whip any foolish
dinosaurs out of its way.
[epic music]
[drum music]
What's that staring
at you in the dark?
Today it would most
likely be an owl,
but way back when it was
probably a relatively small
birdlike dinosaur
from the Campion age
of the Cretaceous period
known as the troodon.
[drum music]
This little guy was first
discovered in October 1855
and was one of the
first dinosaurs found
in North America.
Believe it or not, it was
thought to be a lizard
until 1877, but not
your normal sized gecko.
How big was this guy?
Troodons grew to
about three feet tall
and eight feet long
from head to tail.
They weighed about 100
pounds or two second graders.
[drum music]
Troodons were crafty
little meat eaters
and are believed
to be night hunters
given their oversized eyes.
These huge eyes helped them
to see clearly in the dark.
They must have been
pretty smart, too
as their brains were considered
to be big for their size.
They also had a really big
set of hind or back legs too,
making them as speedy
as they were clever.
But do you know what
they didn't have?
Dentists, ouch.
[drum music]
You may not realize it,
but dinosaurs didn't just
suddenly spring into existence
200 million years ago
as huge toothy and
extremely hungry beasts.
Just like all living
creatures, they evolved
from a family of
primitive reptiles
that are known as archosaurs
or ruling lizards.
[gentle music]
Archosaurs weren't
all that different
from the dinosaurs
that evolved from them.
The main difference was
that these Triassic reptiles
were a lot smaller than the
dinosaurs we have all come
to know over the years.
They did, however,
possess certain features
that set them apart from
their more famous descendants.
Some of whom we are going to
learn all about right here.
But even the archosaurs
are believed to have come
from another type of creature.
Paleontologists believe
that they have identified
the archosaur from which
all dinosaurs are evolved.
This little fellow was
known as the lagosuchus,
or sometimes even marisuchus,
translated from
the Greek language,
its name means rabbit crocodile.
Is that cute or what?
[creature growls]
[epic music]
The lagosuchus was a quick
and tiny little reptile
that scurried across
the dense forests
of early South America
during the Triassic period.
Even cooler, the archosaurs
of the Triassic period
also spawned the very
first flying reptiles,
known as pterosaurs, and even
the crocodiles we know today.
Scientists believe that
the Pangean supercontinent,
which was the largest
land mass on the planet
during its time, was home
to all manner of archosaurs
and believe it or not, even
two legged crocodiles, whoa.
[epic music]
[creature roars]
Everyone likes to come in
first, but can you imagine
being the first?
In history, the
megalosaurus was first,
as in the first dinosaur to
ever be given a scientific name
but there's so much more
about this great lizard
than its name implies,
let's get to know it.
[drum music]
The megalosaurus was a
large, meat eating dinosaur
that lived in what was
the middle Jurassic period
about 166 million years ago
in what is now known
as Southern England.
Scientists discovered this
big dude way back in 1824
in a quarry at Stone's
Field in Oxfordshire.
But to date, there's not a
lot known about this titan
because no one has ever found
a complete
megalosaurus skeleton.
That was only one of the
megalosaurus's firsts.
Along with the iguanodon,
the megalosaurus
was also one of the first
ever dinosaur models
to ever be shown to the public.
It took place at the London's
World's Fair way back in 1854.
Wow, imagine what the first
people to ever get to look
at a dinosaur must
have been thinking.
Talk about wondrous.
[drum music]
Another first for the
megalosaurus is that it was
the first dinosaur to
ever be talked about
in modern fiction print.
In 1853, the great and
famous British author
Charles Dickens wrote
in his book Bleak House,
it would not be wonderful
to meet a megalosaurus,
40 feet long or so, waddling
like an elephantine lizard,
up Pulvern Hill, ha, would you
want to meet a megalosaurus?
Not me.
[drum music]
While no one has been able
to piece together accurately
just what a megalosaurus
looked like,
one thing is for sure,
it is widely believed
that this beast was big.
[epic music]
[creature roars]
One of the first dinosaurs
to ever be discovered
was the mighty iguanodon, and
we're ready to introduce you
to this marvelous plant
eating gentle giant.
[epic music]
The iguanodon, a
duck billed creature
whose name means
iguana tooth, existed
in the early Cretaceous period,
all the way to the
late Jurassic period,
99 to 160 million years ago.
They had lots of homes too
and were found to be native
to Asia, Australia, Africa,
Europe and North America.
[epic music]
Iguanodons were
large, bulky critters
that weighed about as much
as a big van does today.
Up to five tons.
[epic music]
These handsome fellows could
grow to be around 39 feet long.
Because of their weight, they
were one of the slowpokes
of the dinosaur kingdom,
moving only at an estimated
14 miles per hour at top speed.
[epic music]
The iguanodon stood mostly on
their two massive back legs
but they could walk
on all fours as well.
Their arms were only 25%
smaller than their hind legs
and would usually hang low
while the creature would walk.
Their arms may have
been smaller, but
they were super handy.
Like humans, each
iguanodon had five fingers.
That count includes
a large thumb spike
which they would use
to protect themselves
from other meanies out there.
[epic music]
Here's another big
guy, the gigantosaurus,
whose name means
giant Southern lizard,
lived in what is now
known as Argentina
approximately 97 to
98 million years ago
and was one of the largest
known meat eating dinosaurs
in the world.
[epic music]
The gigantosaurus was discovered
by an amateur fossil hunter
who got a lot more
than he bargained for
when he unearthed the
bones of this huge lizard
in the Patagonian region
of Argentina back in 1993.
How big was it?
To be honest, the exact size
has been hard to figure out
due to the incompleteness
of the gigantosaurus bones
scientists have found so far.
That makes it next
to impossible to say
that it was definitely
bigger than the fearsome
tyrannosaurus rex, which
it predated by a whopping
30 million years, but it's a
popular belief that it was.
[epic music]
There have been lots of
size estimates concluded
by several researchers based
on all sorts of methods.
Depending on how the missing
parts of the skeleton
have been put back together,
many people believe
that the actual size
of the gigantosaurus
falls somewhere between
the tyrannosaurus rex
and the mighty spinosaurus.
[epic music]
Here's what we know for sure
about this titan among
dinosaurs so far.
Judging by what has been found
of these glorious beasts,
the gigantosaurus had
a really strong neck
and the bone connecting
its noggin to its neck
was very big and
pretty powerful.
[creature growls]
In the movie Jurassic Park,
the interesting little creature
known as the dilaphosaurus
was a poison spitting monster
with an expandable
frill around its neck.
But sometimes things
are not what they seem.
In fact, the meat
eating dilaphosaurus
was far from little,
had no neck frill
and never spit poison
at anything or anyone.
Let's get smart and learn
the facts, what do you say?
[tribal music]
Dilaphosaurus, whose name
means two crested lizard,
lived in what is now North
America during the early
Jurassic period, about
193 million years ago.
In the 1940s, three
skeletons were found
in northern Arizona, and
scientists immediately
began putting together
the puzzle to solve
the mysteries of these
newly discovered creatures.
[epic music]
Did you know that dilaphosaurus
was one of the first big
predatory dinosaurs,
though it was smaller
than some later ones?
It was slender and lightly
built and though the skull
was proportionately
large, it was delicate.
The dilaphosaurus's
snout was narrow
and the upper jaw had a gap
or kink below the nostril.
What made it most
recognizable, though,
is the pair of plate
shaped crests on its skull.
[tribal music]
Dilaphosaurus's teeth
were long, curved, thin
and compressed sideways.
The teeth of this critter's
lower jaw were much smaller
than the ones found
on its upper jaw.
Most of the teeth had
serrations or tinier teeth
at their front and back edges
and were covered in enamel.
Enamel covers your teeth too,
so you'd better brush them
to make sure that
they stay strong.
[epic music]
Its neck was long,
its bones were hollow.
This made it very light, so
its movements were very fast.
Dilaphosaurus had powerful arms
with four sharply
clawed fingers.
They also had large legs
which they would stand upon,
making them total about
nine feet tall, wow!
[tribal music]
How cool would it be if
you had your very own
built in musical instrument?
The plant eating dinosaur
the parasaurolophus,
has just that, and
that's not the only thing
that sets it apart from
the usual big lizard.
[tribal music]
The parasaurolophus
whose names translates to
near crested lizard lived
in what is now North America
during the late
Cretaceous period
about 66 to 70
million years ago.
[tribal music]
Standing at about
eight feet tall,
they would have made
great basketball players
but they were a little
too long for the court,
measuring in at about 33 feet
and weighing in at an average
of three and a half tons.
That's about as
much as a cargo van
and cargo vans weren't very
good at basketball either, ha.
[tribal music]
What sets these cute
little critters apart
from other dinosaurs is
the cool looking crest
upon their heads that
was used for trumpeting.
Their crest was hollow
and had tubes leading
from each nostril to
the tops of their heads.
Imagine having two flutes
attached to your nose.
You may have looked funny, but
wow, would you sound great.
[tribal music]
Scientists originally
thought that the tubes
of a parasaurolophus
were originally used
as a snorkel to help them
swim around underwater
for long periods of time.
Later, though, it was
discovered that the tips
of these tubes had no air holes,
so that would be impossible.
So what are they for?
These built in noisemakers
are what they would use
to talk and keep
track of each other.
Ha, can you imagine what
a group of them must have
sounded like when
they were together?
Much louder than you
and your friends.
Ha, just think of
those crazy tunes.
It would be like an
incredible Jurassic concert.
[tribal music]
[creature growls]
When not tooting the night away,
the parasaurolophus could
be found walking around
on either two or all
four of its legs,
making it easier for them to
snag those late night snacks
of fruits and veggies with
their duck like beaks.
[epic music]
It sure would be cool if some
of the more gentle dinosaurs
were still around, but sadly,
their time has come and gone.
So what happened to them?
That kind of explanation
can be really complicated
but let's see if we can
answer that question for you
in simple terms.
About 66 million years ago,
something happened on earth
which scientists call the KPG,
the Cretaceous Paleogene
extinction event.
Otherwise known as the KT,
the Cretaceous Tertiary
extinction event.
[epic music]
What does extinction mean?
Well, that's what happens
when things go away forever.
During the time
we just described,
a very big extinction took place
and some 3/4 of the
plant and animal species
on the planet died off
with the exception
of some animals
that are still alive today like
sea turtles and crocodiles.
[epic music]
Interestingly enough,
no animals weighing more
than 55 pounds survived.
This event marked the end
of the Cretaceous period
and the beginning of
our current period
known as the Cenozoic era.
[creature growls]
[epic music]
In 1980, a team of
scientists proposed
that the KPG extinction was
caused by a massive comet
or asteroid hitting
the earth about
that 66 million years ago.
Upon impact, the asteroid
set off a really cold winter,
much longer and colder than
the winters we know today.
[epic music]
The endless cold made
it impossible for plants
and animals to do
what they needed to do
to live long and prosper.
As a result, a wide range
of plants and animals
passed on during
the KPG extinction.
Unfortunately, both
kinds of dinosaurs,
birdlike and otherwise,
were the poor victims
of this happenstance.
[epic music]
Scientists believe that
an estimated 75% or more
of all species on
earth vanished, wow!
That's super scary,
but thankfully
our friends the dinosaurs
left enough behind
for us to find, study and
piece together information
about them.
Their existence will live
on both in our imaginations
and in museums where we
can go and visit them.
- [Scale] We learned so much
from you, Professor Claw.
- Yeah, whatever can
we do to repay you?
- Hmm, well, you can
bring me a burger
from Space Jack's fly
through, everything on it.
- Deal.
♪ I'm trying to be calm
♪ And act so cool
♪ There ain't no use
trying to hold it inside ♪
♪ Before another comes
and makes me a fool ♪
♪ I'm gonna look you
right in the eyes ♪
♪ It's your thing
♪ Do what you feel
♪ Do what you like
♪ It's your thing
♪ Do you what you feel
♪ Do you what you like
♪ Yeah
♪ I can't believe you
make me feel this way ♪
♪ No other girl has done
me quite like that ♪
♪ You got me thinking
'bout the morning sun ♪
♪ Instead of sneaking
out the back door ♪
♪ It's your thing
♪ Do what you feel
♪ Do what you like
♪ It's your thing
♪ Do what you feel
♪ Do what you like
♪ Oh
♪ It's your thing
♪ Do what you feel
♪ Do what you like
♪ It's your thing
♪ Do what you feel
♪ Do what you like
♪ Oh
♪ Come on
♪ Maybe she's playing me
♪ And I can't see
♪ Maybe this girl's
got me figured out ♪
♪ Maybe I'm gonna wake
to find her gone ♪
♪ But til then
♪ It's your thing
♪ Do what you like
♪ Do what you feel
♪ It's your thing
♪ Do what you like, yeah baby
♪ Do what you like, yeah
[tribal music]